[Music]
welcome to podcast where we are up to
chapter 15 at the beginning of infinity
titled
the evolution of culture here in this
chapter
what we're learning about is a number of
quite new
ways in which david deutsch approaches
the spread of ideas
what we're going to talk about in
particular are what are known as
memes now a meme is a technical term
for an idea that tends to get itself
replicated that tends to get itself
copied
so that it spreads through different
minds through different people
now this idea of a meme for anyone who's
new to this
is somewhat different to the idea of a
meme that appears on the internet
although
memes that appear on the internet those
funny things those funny cartoons that
are shared between people
they are themselves memes of a kind but
when we talk about memes when we speak
about memes we're speaking about a much
broader category of ideas
and david's going to really refine not
only what
our understanding of memes are
the mental or abstract analog of a gene
we're not only going to refine our
understanding of what that is
but importantly for him in the central
one of the central themes of the
beginning of infinity
is how it is that memes are replicated
under what conditions
do they tend to get replicated and under
what conditions do they not
tend to get replicated and what is the
process
by which they get replicated now this
centrality
of the idea of means for the beginning
of infinity
i've touched on before with respect to
how it is brought up in the beginning of
infinity
one important way which comes up in the
beginning of infinity is the discussion
of
and the distinction between static
versus dynamic societies
as i often do sometimes in these
podcasts i do tend to steal the thunder
of the main point that's coming later
and i'm about to do that now
so let me preface everything that we're
about to
talk about with the idea that perhaps
there can be no
greater civilizational challenge than to
ensure that we
become dynamic societies and avoid being
static societies that this is the one
fundamental thing which can ensure
either
you will definitely go extinct as a
civilization or you have the potential
to have an unbounded open-ended future
of knowledge creation before you the
distinction rests upon
whether or not the culture is saturated
with
anti-rational memes anti-rational means
are memes that
tend to disable the capacity of their
holders
to criticize themselves so if you feel
as though there are ideas in your
society
that you may not criticize and therefore
may not seek improvement of
then this can tend to slow down the rate
of progress in your society
in the worst cases it can stop progress
altogether
and we can end up in a static society
and then we might even get regression
where the society moves backwards in
various ways on the other hand
if we can avoid the ideas that tend to
cause us
not to criticize things then we can help
to inculcate a more
dynamic society a more open-ended
society a society that welcomes
criticism
a society that wants to create new
things rather than remain satisfied with
the status quo
okay so after that marvelous
introduction
let's get straight into the reading and
david writes the beginning of this
chapter
subtitled ideas that survive
a culture is a set of ideas that cause
their holders to behave alike in some
ways
by ideas i mean any information that can
be stored in people's brains
and can affect their behaviour thus the
shared values of a nation the ability to
communicate in a particular language the
shared knowledge of an academic
discipline
and the appreciation of a given musical
style are all in this sense
sets of ideas that define cultures many
of them are
inexplicit in fact all ideas have some
inexplicit component
since even our knowledge of the meanings
of words is held largely inexplicitly in
our minds
physical skills such as the ability to
ride a bicycle
have an especially high inexplicit
content as do philosophical concepts
such as freedom and knowledge
the distinction between explicit and
inexplicit
is not always sharp for instance a poem
or a satire
may be explicitly about one subject
while the audience in a particular
culture will reliably
and without being told interpret it as
being about a different one
the world's major cultures including
nations languages philosophical and
artistic movements
social traditions and religions have
been created incrementally
over hundreds or even thousands of years
most of the ideas that define them
including the inexplicit ones have a
long history of being passed from one
person to another
that makes these ideas memes ideas that
are replicators
pause there my reflection so already a
lot has been said about this
explicit and inexplicit distinction this
was made
much earlier on in the beginning of
infinity and you can go back and look at
hopefully you've got the book the
beginning of infinity if you haven't i
urge you to go out and buy it have a
look in the index
and have a look at what the meaning is
of explicit versus inexplicit
explicit of course has something to do
with the capacity to
be able to be put into words and so
certain kinds of ideas have a
highly explicit content scientific
theories have
highly explicit content not to say
there's no inexplicit content but it's
highly explicit
a recipe for baking a cake will be
highly explicit and the more explicit it
is the better because then you'll be
able to replicate
the picture of the cake that's in the
recipe book on the other hand there's a
whole bunch of ideas
that have a much greater inexplicit
content
and sporting skills are like this
roger federer who can serve a tennis
ball really really well
has knowledge of how to do that okay yes
he has certain genetic
propensities to be able to do that as
well but importantly he has
knowledge of how to serve the tennis
ball really well
or how to return the tennis ball really
really well and no doubt he could
probably
coach someone and train them so they can
improve but it's unlikely they'll ever
become as good as he is
even if their genetics was that good
people who are regarded as great
geniuses in many fields
have lots and lots of inexplicit
knowledge the great mathematician that
i've mentioned recently
ramanujan he would have had a lot of
inexplicit knowledge about how it is
that he arrives the theorems that he did
or how it was that he arrived at the
theorems that he did he wasn't able to
explain
fully what the process was that he went
through in other words it's inexplicit
he couldn't put it into words
that doesn't mean that it is imprintable
impossible to put into words it's just
that he didn't know how
and so it's true of many many other
things in our lives
and when david says there that words the
definition of words has lots of
inexplicit content
all you need to do is to consider trying
to explain to someone who is visually
impaired
or completely without sight what
something looks like
if you try to explain what the color red
looks like to someone who's never seen
it before
you'll suddenly it will come down on you
with full force the idea that
this word has lots of inexplicit content
we all know to some extent
what the word red means certainly when
we say the sky is blue
that has lots and lots of inexplicit
content when we
use the term blue all of us agree but to
a person who's never actually
seen the blue sky before trying to
explain to them
what that sensation of blue is like is
going to leave you floundering you're
going to realize that there's that there
is
just a barrier an inexplicit barrier
between you and the person of trying to
put into words what that feeling that
sensation that observation that
sight is actually like back to the book
most of the ideas that define them
including the inexplicit ones have a
long history of being passed from one
person to another
that makes these ideas memes ideas that
are replicators
nevertheless cultures change people
modify cultural ideas in their minds and
sometimes they pass on the modified
versions
inevitably there are unintentional
modifications as well partly because of
straightforward error
and partly because inexplicit ideas are
hard to convey accurately
there is no way to download them
directly from one brain to another
like computer programs even native
speakers of a language will not give
identical definitions of every word
so it can be only rarely if ever that
two people hold precisely the same
cultural idea in their minds
that is why when the founder of a
political or philosophical movement
or a religion dies or even before
schisms typically happen the movement's
most devoted followers are often shocked
to discover that they disagree about
what its doctrines really are
it is not much different when a religion
has a holy book in which the doctrines
are stated
explicitly then there are disputes about
the meanings of the words
and the interpretation of the sentences
pause there just
my brief reflection on that this here is
an
interesting criticism of dogma in fact
it's a
withering criticism of dogma because it
suggests that
even if you were to complain that let's
say
a particular holy book is the inerrant
word of god
that has absolutely nothing to do
whatsoever with
your capacity to understand it
inerrantly
or your capacity to pass it on to
another person inherently
you remain of course always a fallible
person so that even if you had access to
the perfect knowledge
nonetheless because you are a person
you are a human being you are fallible
you are subject to error
your identification of a particular work
as being inerrant as being perfect as
being coming straight from the creator
of the universe
has to be filtered through your mind
your
imperfect mind out into the rest of the
world so if you stand on a street corner
preaching that this is the word of the
lord well
what you have to understand is that the
message that you're passing on is not
perfect
the word of the lord in the book might
very well be perfect
according to your lies but that does not
mean that your reading of it is perfect
you might be emphasizing things
differently in fact the particular copy
of the inerrant word of god
you might have might itself be errant it
might be filled with riddled with errors
of course just as an aside to this there
are general purpose criticisms from the
religious people
of that kind of perspective one would be
that
the higher being it divinely inspires
you and prohibits you from making any
errors however
this would be a general purpose
objection that anyone could make even
where two people have
competing interpretations of the same
inerrant word of the lord
back to the book thus a culture is in
practice defined not by a set of
strictly identical means
but by a set of variants that cause
slightly different characteristic
behaviors
some variants tend to have the effect
that their holders are eager to enact
or talk about them others less so some
are easier than others for potential
recipients to replicate in their own
minds
these factors and others affect how
likely each variant of a mean
is to be passed on faithfully a few
exceptional variants once they appear in
one mind
tend to spread throughout the culture
with very little change in meaning
as expressed in the behaviors they cause
such memes are familiar to us
because long-lived cultures are composed
of them but nevertheless
in another sense they are a very unusual
type of idea
for most ideas are short-lived a human
mind considers many ideas for everyone
that it ever acts upon
and only a small proportion of those
cause behavior that anyone else notices
and of those only a small proportion are
ever replicated by anyone else
so the overwhelming majority of ideas
disappear within a lifetime or less
the behaviour of people in a long-lived
culture is therefore determined partly
by recent
ideas that will soon become extinct and
partly by long-lived memes
exceptional ideas that have been
accurately replicated many times in
succession
pause there my reflection that was
extremely dense
there was a lot of information going on
there and i think it
behooves us to go back and to
just consider what david was saying
essentially the idea here is that for
any individual person
an individual mind we come up with
a vast number of ideas throughout the
course of any day
and only a few of them do we ever act
upon
we think um maybe i should have a coffee
now but maybe we don't act on it we just
have that idea
maybe we have the idea that gee i really
should finish off that essay i've been
writing
but never actually act on it maybe i
think of all the different jobs in which
i could
do and i only act on one of those
there's lots of ideas that remain inside
a particular person's mind and never
cause any
outward manifestation there's no outward
sign that you ever had that idea
there's no behavior that goes along with
that idea but for some there is a
behavior
sometimes you really do write the essay
sometimes you really do take the job
sometimes you go for the walk sometimes
you decide to take up dancing
so on and so forth so sometimes the
ideas you have
cause behaviors now david says so so far
we've got two sorts
the kind of ideas the overwhelming
majority of which don't cause any
behavior at all
some small proportion of your ideas
actually cause you to do something
different
okay their idea you think yes i'll act
on that and you actually do and you
there's some behavior that goes along
with it and then there's an even smaller
proportion
that the behavior happens and someone
else notices it as well
if you're at home on your own and you go
and get a glass of water
well then no one else is ever going to
notice that and it's an idea you had in
your head i feel like a glass of water
you go and get the glass of water it's
caused a behavior so already it's a
rare kind of idea but no one has noticed
it
so there is a small proportion of ideas
where someone else does indeed notice
you turn up to the job interview and
you've decided
not to wear a tie let's say if you're a
man or you decide to turn up shabbily so
people have noticed this particular
behavior in you
and so then we get to the even smaller
proportion of ideas
ideas that you have that cause a
behavior
that are noticed by someone else and
then
other people replicate them so this is
an exceedingly
small fraction of all ideas that ever
exist
if you're the first person to enact a
particular kind of
fashion and someone else copies that
fashion
that's very rare indeed that's a very
rare kind of idea indeed
so if you're a fashion designer and
you're sitting at home and you think
i've got a design for a new hat
it's a strange looking tall and thin
red top hat but you never actually
design it well then that's an idea of
the first kind
there might be an idea of the second
kind where you decide well i'm actually
going to
design create build this
strange hat and you do but then you
destroy it because you think it's ugly
that's an idea of the second kind and
then there's the idea of the third kind
where you
think about it design it build it
and keep it and wear it and everyone
else notices
but they don't particularly like it and
so you realize that this is a bad idea
but at least they've noticed and then
there's the fourth kind of idea
where it takes off as a fashion where
other people decide to replicate that
idea
they're interested in your new design
for a hat and so they all start
wandering around
in your new hat that's the idea that is
replicated by
someone else but as david says the
overwhelming majority of ideas disappear
within a lifetime
or less one of our purposes here in this
chapter
is to try to tease out what are the
reasons why some ideas
do end up in that fourth category of
getting replicated
affecting people's ideas but persisting
over time and causing a change in
behavior
that actually has some longer lasting
effect on the culture
as opposed to certain other ideas that
don't have such an effect
and so back to the book and david ryan's
a fundamental question in the study of
cultures is
what is it about a long-lived meme that
gives it this
exceptional ability to resist change
throughout
many replications another central to the
theme of this book
is when such memes do change
what are the conditions under which they
can change
for the better the idea that cultures
evolve
is at least as old as that of evolution
in biology
but most attempts to understand how they
evolve have been based on
misunderstandings of evolution
for example the communist thinker karl
marx believed that his theory of history
was evolutionary because it spoke of a
progression through historical stages
determined by economic laws of motion
but the real theory of evolution has
nothing to do with predicting the
attributes of organisms
from those of its ancestors marx also
thought that darwin's theory of
evolution
provides a basis in natural science for
the historical class struggle
he was comparing his idea of inherent
conflict between socioeconomic classes
with the supposed competition between
biological species
fascist ideologies such as nazism
likewise used garbled or inaccurate
evolutionary ideas such as
the survival of the fittest to justify
violence
but in fact the competition in
biological evolution is not just between
different species
but between variants of genes within a
species
which does not resemble the supposed
class struggle at all
it can give rise to violence or other
competition between species
but it can also produce cooperation such
as the symbiosis between flowers and
insects
and all sorts of intricate combinations
of the two paused my reflection this is
just an aside
and stretches all the way back to
chapters that spoke
more directly about evolution but this
idea of the survival of the fittest
i don't think it's something that darwin
himself ever said and it is actually
a tautology of a kind because
if we ask what is defined as the fittest
so some
if if evolution by natural selection is
the survival of the fittest
then what what are the fittest well the
fittest by definition are those that
survive
and so what then are the ones that
well the ones only that are the fittest
so this doesn't really help anything
um it doesn't really help to explain
what's going on in evolution by natural
selection
the true explanation is of course to do
with
the capacity of genes to replicate in
the circumstances under which they will
replicate the environments in which they
find themselves
are fittest namely the environments
where they're going to be replicated
and the reason they get replicated is
because they're selfish in other words
that is their sole objective is to
replicate themselves not because they're
consciously
got that feeling of selfishness or
anything like that but because
that essentially is what genes do they
try to have themselves replicated that's
their
purpose in existence okay and more
substantively
on this passage here is
indeed there is it's a form of scientism
isn't it it's this idea that
because something is true in science
because there well there's an element of
truth within this
that obviously evolution by natural
selection is a
true theory it's correct it's an
explanation of how biological organisms
work
that does not mean it can be
extrapolated into domains
outside of biology it's not applicable
in those other domains
marx thought it was but that's incorrect
and the reason that it's incorrect is
because the unit of selection is a gene
which he never knew anyway
but moreover as david has said it's just
a metaphor he was using a metaphor and
taking the metaphor too seriously
comparing evolution of biological
organisms
to the way in which a state is going to
evolve over time to change over time
so he saw change going on in the natural
world
and so he thought therefore change going
on society
the laws or the scientific principles to
discover
that that obtain in this particular area
that are
not predictive but are explanatory in
this particular area
are going to be explanatory in this
particular area but worse than that
he thought that you could use this to
predict things and as david quite
rightly says there
we although we have this good
explanatory theory in biology to some
extent there are gaps again go back to
earlier chapters in the beginning of
infinity all about this
about how we do indeed have gaps in our
understanding of evolution by natural
selection that's not to say it's false
there are gaps in every single
scientific theory it's not to say that
they are
utterly false i should say in every
single respect they're not
they're our best understandings at the
moment however
one part of evolution by natural
selection does indeed say
that we cannot predict what the
organisms are going to evolve into in
the future it doesn't allow us to do
that kind of prediction
but marx misunderstood uh what evolution
by natural selection was all about
and thought that he could not only take
it as a
metaphor for how societies undergo
change over time but thought he could
use it to predict
what kind of change would occur over
time
he thought that he could predict the
growth of knowledge which as we know
is not possible okay let's go back to
the book and david writes
although marx and the fascists assumed
false theories of biological evolution
it is no accident that analogies between
society and the biosphere
are often associated with grim visions
of society
the biosphere is a grim place it is rife
with plunder deceit
conquest enslavement starvation and
extermination hence those who think that
cultural evolution is like that end up
either opposing it
advocating a static society or condoning
that kind of immoral behavior
as necessary or inevitable paul's there
there's a lot to unpack there as well
and this is going to lead into
the next chapter and the subsequent
chapters and
and an underlying part of david
deutsch's philosophy
which is that the vision of the natural
world that we are presented with
sometimes
today as being this clean
pristine provider of resources
a provider of our safety
and our home and our comfort okay the
natural world
is the ideal and we come along and we
pollute it and ruin it and destroy it
that this vision that we are sometimes
presented with today
is utterly false and i guess at least
to say something on the side of marx
here
at least he kind of understood that the
biosphere was indeed a grim place
and did entail all of these awful things
like starvation and extermination
because that's true nature is red in
tooth and claw it is a cruel place
if you're concerned about the suffering
of animals then you should be concerned
about trying to prevent predators
from getting hold of their prey but then
of course if you do that you're caught
in a vine because that's going to
cause the suffering of predators so
perhaps we should have
meat farms for predators and perhaps we
should fence off all the predators from
all of the prey
and our task as human being should be if
we want to prevent the suffering of
other conscious creatures like animals
literally imprison these animals or in
some other way
corral them so that they don't have much
to do with one another
in fact they should be kept individually
separate from each one from another
because male animals will fight amongst
themselves so if you're really
interested in
the supposed suffering of animals or
concerned about
bloodshed among animals then we should
do what we can to protect animals from
themselves because of all the harms that
animals suffer
surely the suffering at the hands of
other animals is what we should be most
concerned about because that is the
worst form of suffering that any animal
undergoes whatever the case people might
very well have
these competing ideas in their mind on
the one hand
the natural environment is the ideal
pristine place
and that's what human civilization
should be trying to preserve
the natural environment because it's the
ideal and yet on the other hand
keep the competing idea in their mind
that in fact
evolution by natural selection and the
animal kingdom
is all about base concerns about
avoiding starvation about deceiving one
another
and about killing your prey and avoiding
the predators
so we've got two visions
the natural world is being grim and
awful and we don't want to be like that
and the natural world as being the
pristine ideal towards
or that we need to protect so marx has
used this
this analogy between the truth
of the natural world as being an awful
place and in fact as the world view of
david deutsch would
teach us that in fact it's the natural
world that we have to protect ourselves
from
it can be something as grandiose as the
asteroid heading
towards us perfectly naturally but we
want to avoid that and so artificially
we're going to have to create the
knowledge to push it out of the way
or it can be something more day-to-day
the thunderstorm that's going to happen
the hail that's going to fall from the
sky
the cold temperatures that are going to
come tonight we need to protect
ourselves from that
and we're going to need technology to do
that we're going to need houses we're
going to need air conditioning we're
going to need energy in order to
protect ourselves from the worst aspects
of the natural environment
the perfectly natural viruses and
bacteria that are infecting our bodies
in in all sorts of awful ways we want to
protect ourselves from
so nature is not the ideal that we wish
to protect it's not
us that are a danger to nature or
insofar as we are a danger to nature
we are only a danger of nature in order
to respond
to the constant slings and arrows that
nature is trying to
assail us with and so we need to do
things to protect ourselves
and indeed the life forms that we care
about our pets and other animals and so
on and so forth
because hurricanes are as
indiscriminately going to destroy
human homes and buildings and lives as
they will animal homes and lives
okay let's continue and david writes
arguments by analogy are
fallacies almost any analogy between two
things contains
some grain of truth but one cannot tell
what that is until one has an
independent explanation for what is
analogous to what
and why the main danger in the biosphere
culture analogy is that it encourages
one to conceive of the human condition
in a reductionist way
that obliterates the high-level
distinctions that are essential for
understanding it
such as those between mindless and
creative determinism and choice right
and wrong
such distinctions are meaningless at the
level of biology indeed the analogy is
sometimes drawn for the very purpose of
debunking the common sense idea of human
beings
as causal agents with the ability to
make moral choices
and to create new knowledge for
themselves pause down my reflection uh
this
is a contentious point
and i guess people who believe
in a deterministic
worldview when it comes to society must
reject
that and so it is controversial in many
many ways
but to me and i think to many people
listening
it will seem like a
deep truth about what human beings are
human beings as causal agents
with the ability to make moral choices
and to create new knowledge for
themselves
all of those things kind of are tied up
together
this capacity to create knowledge means
that you're a causal
agent means that you are bringing into
the world something that wasn't
there before and because it wasn't there
before
now you have a wider array of choices to
make
there is more choices available before
you about what to do
because you've literally bought into
being you've literally created a piece
of knowledge that was not there before
any discovery in physics which leads to
a piece of new technology
is something that allows us to therefore
choose to use that technology in the
future
my go-to example has been fission energy
this idea that prior to the advent of
nuclear physics prior to
scientists fully understanding there was
energy
potential energy held within the nucleus
of all atoms
prior to us understanding that that
there was no
possible way in which to conceive of how
to get energy out of
the nuclei of atoms but once we knew
there was energy in there then the
process could begin
of trying to extract that energy in some
way
it turned out by splitting the atom we
could do that firing neutrons at the
atom could
cause large nuclei to to split apart and
to release
lots and lots of energy and that energy
could be gathered together
because it comes out as heat energy you
put it into some water and cause the
water to boil and the water would turn
into steam the steam can spin a turbine
and the turbine can cause a generator to
make electricity and so on and so forth
but prior to that knowledge being
created about the nucleus
we didn't have the choice we didn't have
the choice
about building a fission reactor or
building a coal-fired power station
we now do have that choice and so
therefore it becomes
a moral choice should we build this kind
of
energy source or that kind of energy
source and of course today
that is a huge area of discussion
the lesson behind that is of course that
there will
always be new kinds of energy new
solutions to how to create energy
that will come along and so any debate
about
well we shouldn't use that kind of
energy because it could cause pollution
or that kind of energy because it could
lead to a dangerous accident
avoids the simple point that
all kinds of energy are going to be
transition kinds of energy
there are still places in the world
where we are using
wood in order to generate electricity
rare though those places are they do
still exist
people have transitioned into coal and
from coal to nuclear
and so it will continue to happen but in
the meantime
artificially forcing everyone to use a
particular kind of energy
ignores the fact that if we want to make
progress fast we should probably use
the cheapest most efficient highest
energy density form of energy production
that we can
because it won't be too long in the
future that someone will develop an even
better more efficient
more highly energy dense way of
generating electricity
but that will be slowed down that's
discovery
whatever it is will be slowed down if
you slow down progress
and that can be slowed down by
artificially increasing the cost
of things like knowledge product
knowledge production because you've
slowed down the rate at which people can
get information and so on and so forth
that is a long discussion let's go back
to the book
and david writes as i shall explain
although biological and cultural
evolution are described by the same
underlying theory
the mechanisms of transmission variation
and selection are all
very different that makes the resulting
natural histories different too
there is no close cultural analog of a
species
or of an organism or a cell or a sexual
or asexual reproduction
genes and memes are about as different
as can be at the level of
mechanisms and of outcomes they are
similar only at the lowest level of
explanation
where they are both replicators that
embody knowledge
and are therefore conditioned by the
same fundamental principles
that determine the conditions under
which knowledge can
or cannot be preserved can or cannot
improve
okay i'm skipping a little bit david
talks about a very
interesting perspective on jokes and
where they come from
that some jokes might not indeed be
created by anyone they may very well
have begun as a
non-joke in some way then became a
slightly funny witty remark and
eventually end up as a joke
if you're being chased by a bunch of
rabid taxidermists
don't play dead and of course this is
not to say that jokes
can't be invented they are any stand-up
comedian will tell you
that they work on crafting a joke
and then testing it in front of
audiences and allowing it to evolve over
time
based upon the critical feedback namely
the amount of laughs they're getting
at their stand-up routine um
yeah and what david says on this after
me skipping a little bit he says
he writes people tell each other amusing
stories
some fictional some factual they are not
jokes but some become memes they are
interesting enough for the listeners to
retell them to other people
and some of those people retell them in
turn but they rarely recite them word
for word
nor do they preserve every detail of the
content
hence an often retold story will come to
exist in different versions
some of these versions will be retold
more often than others
in some cases because people find
telling them amusing
when that is the main reason for
retelling them successive versions that
remain in circulation will tend to be
ever more amusing
so the conditions are there for
evolution repeated cycles of imperfect
copying of information
alternating with selection eventually
the story becomes amusing enough to make
people laugh
and a fully fledged joke has evolved
it is conceivable that a joke could
evolve through variations that were not
intended to improve upon the funniness
for example
people who hear a story can mishear or
misunderstand aspects of it or change it
for pragmatic
reasons and in a small proportion of
cases by sheer luck
that will produce a funnier version of
the story which will then propagate
better
if a joke has evolved in that way from a
non-joke it truly has no author
another possibility is that most of the
people who altered the amusing story on
its way to becoming a joke designed
their contributions using creativity to
make it funnier intentionally
in such cases although the joke was
indeed created by variation and
selection its funniness was the result
of human creativity
in that case it would be misleading to
say that no one created it it had many
co-authors
each of whom contributed creative
thought to the outcome but it may still
be that literally no one understands why
the joke is as funny as it is
and hence no one could create another
joke of similar quality at will
paul's there my reflection yes so
there's lots of jokes that people tell
each other like this i like um jerry
seinfeld's famous routine he does in
his television show and jerry talks
about how a survey is published each
year
that talks about what people's greatest
fear is
and typically what comes in second is
death
death comes in second which is
surprising what's first
is public speaking people are more
afraid about public speaking
and jerry quips that that means that at
a funeral the vast majority of people at
the funeral would much rather be in the
casket than delivering the eulogy
and so this kind of joke is something
that is created
by the stand-up comedian and which
possibly goes through a small amount of
refining but at least there we can
identify the author
david goes on to write although we do
not know
exactly how creativity works we do know
that it is itself an evolutionary
process within individual brains
for it depends on conjecture which is
variation and criticism
for the purpose of selecting ideas so
somewhere inside brains
blind variations and selections are
adding up to a creative thought
at a higher level of emergence pause
there
and so here we have some
ideas about creativity that we know so
little about
the creativity in a human mind how it
operates after all
once we do have a fully fledged
scientific theory of how creativity
works
a fully fledged philosophical theory of
how knowledge is created
then we'll be able to program agi
artificial general intelligence
but as yet the repeated failures of
people to produce
artificial general intelligence is due
entirely
to misunderstanding the
capacity of humans to create knowledge
and until we understand how it is that
we do
what we do there's no way we're going to
be able to create
an external device that can do what we
do
that external device by the way would be
a person so it's kind of
wrong to refer to such a thing as
a thing or as something other than
a person anything that can create
explanatory knowledge as a person
it will be able to understand the world
around it and it will have an
open-ended capacity to improve itself
and to improve its own knowledge
which would also entail being able to
create all the senses that we have
to have all the thoughts that we have
the motivations we have
values and emotions and so on okay i'm
skipping a bit more here where david
talks about
how the idea of memes has been
criticized over time
and he rejects that criticism and
provides a number of reasons why
so i'm skipping beyond some of the
criticisms
and the discussion on jokes and i'll go
to the section where he starts to talk
about the
rules of grammar and he writes we say
i am learning to play the piano in
british scene
in british english but never i am
learning to play
the baseball we know how to form such
sentences correctly
but until we think about it very few of
us know that the inexplicit grammatical
rule we are following even exists
let alone what it is in american english
the rule is slightly different so the
phrase
learning to play piano is acceptable we
may wonder why
and guess that the british are more fond
of the definite article but again
that is not the explanation in british
english
a patient is in hospital and in american
in the hospital was there my reflection
i think even within
uh certain kinds of british english to
be to be fair uh
northern accents will sometimes
eliminate the
definite article where it should appear
when
where lots of other people think it
should appear for instance someone might
say they're going upstairs
uh instead of going up the stairs uh
so this is this is a function of the way
in which people speak over time
bleeding into rules of grammar of course
so back to the book david writes the
same is true of memes in general they
implicitly contain information that is
not known to the holders but which
nevertheless
causes the holders to behave alike hence
just as native english speakers may be
mistaken about why they have said
the in a given sentence people enacting
all sorts of other memes often give
false explanations even to themselves
of why they are behaving in that way
like genes all
memes contain knowledge often inexplicit
of how to cause their own replication
this knowledge is encoded in strands of
dna
or remembered by brains respectively in
both cases
the knowledge is adapted by causing
itself to be replicated
it causes that more reliably than nearly
all its variants do
in both cases this adaptation is the
outcome of alternating rounds of
variation and selection
however the logic of the copying
mechanism is very different for genes
and means
in organisms that reproduce by dividing
either all the genes are copied into the
next generation or
if the individual fails to reproduce
none
are in sexual reproduction a full
complement of genes randomly chosen from
both parents is copied
or none are in all cases the dna
duplication process is automatic genes
are copied
indiscriminately one consequence is that
some genes can be replicated for many
generations
without ever being expressed causing any
behavior
at all whether your parents ever broke a
bone or not
genes for repairing bones will barring
unlikely mutations be passed on to you
and your descendants
the situation faced by memes is utterly
different
each meme has to be expressed as
behaviour
every time it is replicated for it is
that behavior
and only that behavior given the
environment created by all the other
memes that affects the replication
that is because a recipient cannot see
the representation of the meme in the
holder's mind
a meme cannot be downloaded like a
computer program
if it is not enacted it will not be
copied pause there my reflection
am i just exposition on this point so
a meme is inside of your mind
represented in your mind in some way but
no one has access to that
this is why this so-called bucket theory
of mind is so false
popper talks about karl popper talks
about the bucket and the searchlight
and the bucket theory of mind is this
idea that knowledge is somewhat more
like a fluid that you can pour from one
person into another's
from from one mind to another and so a
teacher standing at the front of a class
is able to transmit the knowledge to the
students
in the same way that pouring a fluid
from one vessel into another
is accomplished of course this is
utterly false there's no way of
inherently faithfully getting the
knowledge from one mind into another
instead what has to happen
is that the speaker the person with the
knowledge the person with the means
has to undertake some behavior that
behavior might include speaking
that behaviour might include
gesticulating that behavior might
include writing something
on a board so on and so forth there are
various behaviors that might go on
but then the recipient of this idea the
the intended recipient
has to interpret the behavior they're
watching the behavior
they don't have direct access to the
mind to the means
but only the behaviors which they might
replicate
and so if someone's speaking giving an
explanation
this is the knowledge then the person
hearing that
is going to hear it and interpret it and
try and understand it in their own mind
such that at some later time they will
be able to express it as well
but not in exactly the same words
necessarily they might not remember it
by rote
but they will have an understanding and
their understanding might result in
slightly different words being
used to articulate this particular
explanation
we're going to come to that as well so
as david says a meme cannot be
downloaded like a computer program
in other words there's not this same
sort of error correction that goes on
inside of a
computer program there is a
further level of interpretation that
must go on
itself filled with errors and david has
a picture
all about this so i'll put the picture
up and let's just read what he has to
say about this
and he writes the upshot of this is that
memes necessarily become embodied
in two different physical forms
alternately
as memories in a brain and anders
behavior
we can see there so we've got a meme in
brain number one
and that causes the behavior of this
first person
the second person is observing that
behavior from person number one
and trying to interpret what that meme
is and so that meme will end up
in that brain number two now whether or
not
the meme in brain number two is exactly
the same
as the meme in brain number one is a
open-ended question
it depends well it depends upon the
circumstance maybe it is
faithfully reproduced faithfully
replicated
but it may also be replicated with some
error with some slight variation we can
still say that
aspects of the mean or the mean plex or
the broad idea has been replicated
but not in the same way that genes
typically typically get replicated
because the gene needs to be perfectly
replicated
or not replicated at all or otherwise a
mutation occurs
whatever the case the process here is of
copying behavior
in order to replicate the
meme in the brain of the second person
which then causes behavior and so on as
we see
david goes on to write each of the two
forms has to be copied specifically
translated into the other form
in each meme generation meme generations
are simply successive instances of
copying
to another individual technology can add
further stages to a meme's life cycle
for instance the behavior may be to
write something down thus embodying the
meme in a
third physical form which may later
cause a person who reads it to enact
other behavior
which then causes the meme to appear in
someone's brain
but all memes must have at least two
physical forms
in contrast for genes the replicator
exists in one physical form the dna
strand
of a germ cell even though it may be
copied to other locations in the
organism
translated into rna and expressed as
behavior none of those forms is a
replicator
the idea that the behavior might be a
replicator is a form of lamarcism
since it implies the behaviors that had
been modified by circumstances
would be inherited because of the
alternating forms of a meme
it has to survive too different and
potentially unrelated
mechanisms of selection in every
generation the brain
memory form has to cause the holder to
enact the behavior
and the behavior form has to cause the
new recipient to remember it
and to enact it so for example although
religions prescribe behaviors such as
educating one's children to adopt a
religion
the mere intention to transmit a meme to
one's children
or anyone else is quite insufficient to
make that happen
that is why the overwhelming majority of
attempts to start a new religion
fail even if the founder members try
hard to propagate it
in such cases what has happened is that
an idea that people have adopted
has succeeded in causing them to enact
various behaviors
including ones intended to cause their
children and others to do the same
but the behaviour has failed to cause
the same idea to be stored in the minds
of those recipients
the existence of long-lived religions is
sometimes explained from the premise
that
children are gullible or that they are
easily frightened
by tales of the supernatural but that is
not the explanation
the overwhelming majority of ideas
simply do not have what it takes to
persuade
or frighten or cajole or otherwise cause
children or anyone else into doing the
same to other people
if establishing a faithfully replicating
meme were that easy
the whole adult population in our
society would be proficient at algebra
thanks to the efforts made to teach it
to them when they were children to be
exact
they would all be proficient algebra
teachers
to be a meme an idea has to contain
quite sophisticated knowledge of how to
cause humans to do at least two
independent things assimilate the meme
faithfully
and enact it that some memes can
replicate themselves with great fidelity
for many generations is a token of how
much knowledge they contain
pause there my reflection and
also the end of this episode this is
going to be a
multi-episode treatment of this chapter
because it is
so dense and there are new ideas david
deutsch has
contributed to our understanding of
memes in many
interesting ways this exposition this
explanation that he has given
about the way in which memes are
transmitted is sometimes
poorly understood this idea that they
need to
first cause behaviors in people which
then
cause others to
gain that idea to gain that meme inside
of their mind inside of their brain
and then to enact those behaviors as
well to pass them on and so as he says
there
certain ideas are not very good at this
so teaching everyone at school algebra
doesn't have the result of making
everyone very good at algebra
there's something going wrong there that
those ideas tend not to have what it
takes
we don't have lots of people proficient
at algebra moreover we don't have lots
of people
proficient at algebra teaching out there
because
that teaching of algebra mean isn't
particularly robust
what does seem to be robust what is
passed on from one year to the next is
simply the existence of school
coercive compulsory type schooling that
exists in many different countries
around the world
this idea that we all get our children
into classrooms and sitting in rows
this mean this meme
is robust in many many ways it is
resistant to change
it has existed for centuries and it
doesn't seem like it's going anywhere
soon
our recent experiences of many schools
closing down and i had some thoughts
that
this will reveal to some extent
to some people the poverty of the
schooling system as it exists right now
and that if everyone had their children
at home
learning behind a computer screen in a
more free and perhaps
fun for the student way after all
they're at home after all they're
probably talking to their
their friends via the computer and
they're not being forced to
turn up to lessons at a particular time
in a particular place they have more
time during the day
perhaps those students those parents
perhaps even the teachers would start to
think there's a better way of doing
things
well in fact it turns out that that's
not the case
that that many many people in the system
seem to revert back as soon as possible
to going back into the classroom and so
this meme
of this is the way in which we teach our
young people
we treat young people is resistant to
change
for reasons that i won't get into now
but clearly there is
this idea that causes behavior of
turning up to school
of encouraging people to go to school of
indeed enforcing
the the the um the attendance at school
from people these ideas causing these
behaviors
seem to have no end in sight at the
moment and some people see them as
very virtuous and of course that's one
reason that they would propagate is
because
we see that as an extremely virtuous
thing wrong though that might be for
some of us to think
okay until next time when we move on to
more about memes you can perhaps look
forward to some of my other
shorter bite size introductions to
karl popper and david deutsch until then
thank you
thank you once more to my patreons i've
um
i've gotten a couple more patreons i've
lost a couple of patreons
the numbers seem to go up and down but
there's a
gradual gradual increase and that's
lovely to see
and i'm very grateful to anyone who just
wishes to contribute to topcast if
you're watching this
on youtube then you may not be aware
that there are additional
episodes that are audio only if you
search for top topcast t-o-k-c-a-s-t
on apple itunes or wherever else you get
your
top cast or wherever else you get your
podcast on the other hand if you're an
audio only listener
then you may not be aware there is a
youtube version of this which has some
visuals
and for some episodes more than others
the visuals
i think help some of the explanations
once more thank you again for any
support at all on patreon or paypal
and links to those on my website
www.bretthull.com
thanks again and bye
[Music]
you